<h2>Evolution of the HIV-1 envelope gene is dominated by purifying 
selection</h2>

<p>Edwards, C. T. T., E. C. Holmes, O. G. Pybus, D. J. Wilson, R. P. 
Viscidi, 
					E. J. Abrams, R. E. Phillips and 
A. J. Drummond (2006)<br>
<i>Genetics</i> <B>174</B>: 1441-1453. (<a 
href="http://www.genetics.org/cgi/content/abstract/174/3/1441" 
target="_blank">pdf</a>)</p>

<p>The evolution of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) during 
chronic infection involves the rapid, continuous turnover of genetic 
diversity. However, the role of natural selection, relative to random 
genetic drift, in governing this process is unclear. We tested a 
stochastic model of genetic drift using partial envelope sequences sampled 
longitudinally in 28 infected children. In each case the Bayesian 
posterior (empirical) distribution of coalescent genealogies was estimated 
using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. Posterior predictive simulation 
was then used to generate a null distribution of genealogies assuming 
neutrality, with the null and empirical distributions compared using four 
genealogy-based summary statistics sensitive to nonneutral evolution. 
Because both null and empirical distributions were generated within a 
coalescent framework, we were able to explicitly account for the 
confounding influence of demography. From the distribution of corrected 
<i>P</i>-values across patients, we conclude that empirical genealogies 
are more 
asymmetric than expected if evolution is driven by mutation and genetic 
drift only, with an excess of low-frequency polymorphisms in the 
population. This indicates that although drift may still play an important 
role, natural selection has a strong influence on the evolution of HIV-1 
envelope. A negative relationship between effective population size and 
substitution rate indicates that as the efficacy of selection increases, a 
smaller proportion of mutations approach fixation in the population. This 
suggests the presence of deleterious mutations. We therefore conclude that 
intrahost HIV-1 evolution in envelope is dominated by purifying selection 
against low-frequency deleterious mutations that do not reach 
fixation.</p>

