<h2>The influence of mutation, recombination, population history and selection on patterns of genetic 
diversity in <i>Neisseria meningitidis</i></h2>

<p>Jolley, K. A., D. J. Wilson, P. Kriz, G. McVean and M. C. J. Maiden (2005)<br>
<I>Molecular Biology and Evolution</I> <B>22</B>: 562-569. (<a 
href="http://mbe.oupjournals.org/cgi/reprint/22/3/562" target="_blank">pdf</a>)</p>

<p>Patterns of genetic diversity within populations of human pathogens, shaped by the ecology of 
host-microbe interactions, contain important information about the epidemiological history of infectious 
disease. Exploiting this information, however, requires a systematic approach that distinguishes the 
genetic signal generated by epidemiological processes from the effects of other forces, such as 
recombination, mutation, and population history. Here, a variety of quantitative techniques were employed 
to investigate multilocus sequence information from isolate collections of <i>Neisseria meningitidis</i>, 
a major 
cause of meningitis and septicemia world wide. This allowed quantitative evaluation of alternative 
explanations for the observed population structure. A coalescent-based approach was employed to estimate 
the rate of mutation, the rate of recombination, and the size distribution of recombination fragments from 
samples from disease-associated and carried meningococci obtained in the Czech Republic in 1993 and a 
global collection of disease-associated isolates collected globally from 1937 to 1996. The parameter 
estimates were used to reject a model in which genetic structure arose by chance in small populations, and 
analysis of molecular variation showed that geographically restricted gene flow was unlikely to be the 
cause of the genetic structure. The genetic differentiation between disease and carriage isolate 
collections indicated that, whereas certain genotypes were overrepresented among the disease-isolate 
collections (the "hyperinvasive" lineages), disease-associated and carried meningococci exhibited 
remarkably little differentiation at the level of individual nucleotide polymorphisms. In combination, 
these results indicated the repeated action of natural selection on meningococcal populations, possibly 
arising from the coevolutionary dynamic of host-pathogen interactions.</p>

