<h2>Using host genetics to infer the global spread and evolutionary history of 
HCV subtype 3a</h2>
<p>Lin, S.-K., De Maio, N., Pedergnana, V., Wu, C.-H., Th&eacute;z&eacute;, J., 
Wilson, D. J., Barnes, E. and M. A. Ansari (2021)<br>
<i>Virus Evolution</i> doi:10.1093/ve/veab065 (<a 
href="https://academic.oup.com/ve/advance-article/doi/10.1093/ve/veab065/6317967">pdf</a>)

<p>Studies have shown that HCV subtype 3a is likely to have been circulating in 
South Asia before its global spread. However, the time and route of this 
dissemination remain unclear. For the first time, we generated host and virus 
genome-wide data for more than 500 patients infected with HCV subtype 3a from 
the UK, North America, Australia and New Zealand. We used the host genomic data 
to infer the ancestry of the patients and used this information to investigate 
the epidemic history of HCV subtype 3a. We observed that viruses from hosts of 
South Asian ancestry clustered together near the root of the tree, irrespective 
of the sampling country and that they were more diverse than viruses from other 
host ancestries. We hypothesized that South Asian hosts are more likely to have 
been infected in South Asia and used the inferred host ancestries to 
distinguish between location where the infection was acquired and where the 
sample was taken. Next, we inferred that three independent transmission events 
resulted in the spread of the virus from South Asia to the UK, North America 
and Oceania. This initial spread happened during or soon after the end of World 
War II. This was subsequently followed by many independent transmissions 
between the UK, North America and Oceania. Using both host and virus genomic 
information can be highly informative in studying the virus epidemic history, 
especially in the context of chronic infections where migration histories need 
to be accounted for.</p>

